Taken from https://dba.stackexchange.com/questions/286078/what-exactly-is-an-unstructured-data-and-why-to-use-non-relational-dbms-for-that

1. What exactly is an unstructured data in the context of databases?
2. How is a non relational DBMS like MongoDB better for unstructured data than a RDBMS?
3. Can you give a real life example of unstructured data?

Unfortunately the answer to when a **NoSQL** database system is better than a **RDBMS** is a little subjective which is why it's highly debated. A lot of misinformation has caused the incorrect connotation that a **NoSQL** database is _faster_ than a **RDBMS**, particularly with _big data_, which isn't necessarily true. This connotation is based on the origination story of **NoSQL** databases being used by companies who do have _big data_ who were trying to solve a scale problem actually, but not because of scaling performance rather one of flexibility to allow them the ability as developers / infrastructure administrators to scale faster. (In my opinion, with the availability of modern Cloud services and decoupled services like Azure and AWS, that problem is mostly solved in an alternative way now.) But to this day, those same companies, such as **Facebook** still leverage a **RDBMS** in addition to a **NoSQL** database system, for likely similar amounts of data, because it's not a question of database performance, rather of flexibility and using the right tool for the right job dependent on use case.

At a high level, as previously mentioned, **NoSQL** databases have the advantage of **flexibility** at the trade off of **consistency**, which is a trade-off between the [**ACID Database Principals**](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACID) for _eventual consistency_. This flexibility allows a **NoSQL** database to store unstructured, semi-structured, and highly variable structured data; and it allows that database to be distributed easily when horizontally scaling across a multi-node database cluster. Because of the flexibility with the _schema_ of the data it can store, it doesn't have to worry about _schema_ changes in one node vs another node in a multi-node cluster. Additionally, because of its ability to be _eventually consistent_, it generally doesn't have to worry about having 100% of the same data across every node in the cluster.

Because of its flexibility for scaling horizontally, one can loosely argue (at a high level) that this is where the _performance_ benefit comes from when using **NoSQL** over a traditional **RDBMS**. But the other tradeoffs are your ability to transform and query the data become limited when you're dealing with a **NoSQL** database due to it's lack of a consistent schema. I want to be objective, so I will credit MongoDB with offering a multitude of ways to query the data which I believe are also a little more procedurally programmatic by design, so may be a little user-friendly to a developer who is not very experienced with traditional relational logic. But there's only so much one can do when guaranteed _eventual consistency_ at best as opposed to the actual _guaranteed consistency_ of a **RDBMS**.

As far as actual use-cases for a **NoSQL** database, it depends heavily on the _schema_ of the data (or lack thereof) and the developer's specific use cases and types of querying they'll need to support. Some of the examples you've read are potential use cases, such as an `Email` for example. `Emails` are semi-structured in schema, as far as I would define them. They have a few consistent fields like the `From`, `SentDateTime`, `ReceivedDateTime`, and `Subject` but they all have highly variable fields like the `To`, `CC`, `BCC` and the `Body`. So a **NoSQL** database could make sense in the scenario where the type of querying you'll ever do has predicates dependent only on the `From` and/or `SentDateTime` field. Those would be your keys in your `Emails` _table_, and the `Body` of the message and the `To` field will be the rest of your entity (maybe in a **JSON** format) that's stored in the _table_. (Note the term _table_ is used loosely here for conceptualization.)

Now of course you're saying to yourself "_but you can accomplish just the same in a **RDBMS**_" - which is true, but again the flexibility of **NoSQL** with its _eventual consistency_ allows you to then take the above example _table_ and shard it across multiple nodes more easily when horizontally scaling. So while even some of the main features of a **NoSQL** database are available in a traditional **RDBMS** (in a sense I almost see **NoSQL** being a subset of **RDBMS** from a features perspective) it's flexibility and the rules it has to follow differ enough from a traditional **RDBMS**, allowing it a place in the world we live in.

That being said, over time a lot has changed, even **NoSQL** systems in their original sense have changed a lot and adapted to the progression of the database world (or the ones who haven't die off). The lines between **NoSQL** and **RDBMS** continue to blur (for the better) as both grow to accommodate the things they're missing from one or the other. For example, **ACID** compliant **NoSQL** databases now exist, and **RDBMS** databases with much easier horizontal scaling capabilities exist as well.